[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LILOU: Hello, my
delicious co-creators.
Lilou here.
I'm in Quebec, in
Montreal, with actually
a very famous neuroscientist.
It's quite something because
we never met in person
and yet I know very
much of your work.
We've done Skype interviews.
And here we are here
in your own home.
So thank you so
much for accepting
to do this interview
for GaiamTV.
>>MARIO BEAUREGARD:
Thanks to you.
>>LILOU: I'm very excited
to have this conversation
because I read your book.
And I think it's
very, very important
to have this conversation
and kind of anchor
these yet unexplicable
by traditional science
phenomenon that are happening,
and people experiencing,
such as near death
experiences and even hypnosis
that you actually talk
about in your book.
And what else?
Telepathy and remote
viewing and all that.
So I really, really
appreciate that we're
having this conversation.
And it's kind of
groundbreaking because there's
a lot of things
happening for you.
Tell us about your history.
I know now you belong
to the university.
You've done a lot of research.
And you're part of the
University of Arizona.
You're the author of
the Spiritual Brain,
and Brain Wars is going to
be our main focus today.
So tell us how did this--
where are you at right now?
And what is your focus?
Because I know you're
coming together,
a whole group of you in the US.
Plus you belong now
to this university
and not anymore to the
University of Montreal.
So what is really
going on right now?
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
I was having problems at
the University of Montreal
because some of the
phenomena I was investigating
that was creating a problem,
ideological problem.
Because the people,
my colleagues,
some of my colleagues
were reductive materialist
scientists.
Because it's still quite
mainstream in universities.
So they didn't like the
kind of research I was doing
and the kind of
books I was writing,
my ideas, and so
on and so forth.
So I thought that perhaps it
would be better somewhere else.
And I received an offer
from Gary Schwartz
at the University of Arizona
who himself studies--
he did studies about mediumship.
And he's very open-minded,
and it's a great place
because they have a
center of consciousness
studies over there.
So I'm affiliated with
them since a year now.
>>LILOU: And I know
you got together
with other scientists
such as Larry Dossey
that I had a beautiful
time meeting.
He's absolutely wonderful.
What is going on there?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, I have
co-organized a meeting
at the University of
Arizona with Gary Schwartz
and also another
researcher, Lisa Miller.
She's at Columbia University.
She's studying the
relationship between psychology
and spiritual experiences,
and spirituality, as well.
So we co-organized a meeting.
And in this meeting, many
famous scientists attended,
and they were all scientists
who do not believe anymore
in the old materialist
worldview in science.
And people like
Rupert Sheldrake,
for instance, or Larry
Dossey, Pim van Lommel,
and so on and so forth, and
a great group of people.
And we have decided to create
a new scientific organization
which we call post materialist.
So now, because materialism
has been the dominant view--
or the dominant paradigm
in science for nearly four
centuries now.
But it started to be challenged
100 years ago by quantum
physics.
But in the other
scientific disciplines,
like medicine, for instance, or
biomedical research, biology,
neuroscience, the
materialist view
is still quite influential.
>>LILOU: But this wasn't
always the case, right?
So if we look back in
history and the origins
before really things
became material,
it was not before that, was it?
Or how did it progress?
Because a little by little, it
went more and more materialist.
That's what you're
saying in the book.
>>BEAUREGARD: Actually, at
the beginning of science,
the fathers of what we
call modern science, 400
years ago-- all of these people
were deeply spiritual and also
religious.
People like Isaac Newton
or Rene Descartes,
for instance, or
even Galileo Galilei.
But after a few hundred
years following them,
there was a big change.
Scientists became to
believe only in the matter.
Because the fathers
of modern science,
Descartes and so
on and so forth,
proposed a number
of basic postulates
about the nature
of reality and how
we can investigate these things.
One of the principals
they proposed
was that everything in the
universe is composed of matter.
But these pioneers
knew that there
was something else than matter.
As a matter of fact,
they all believed
that what we call
matter was created
by a sort of
intelligent designer
at the origin of
everything in the universe.
But this was forgotten after
a few centuries of science.
During the 19th century, for
instance, scientists only
kept these basic assumptions
about the universe.
But they started to think
that perhaps it was not
necessary to refer to
an intelligent source
at the origin of
everything in the universe.
So they started to believe that
matter itself could explain
everything, including
us, human beings.
But during the 20th
century, and also
the beginning of
the 21st century,
we have collected so many data
in various fields of science
that we know for sure now
that this old materialist
worldview is totally
wrong, completely wrong.
>>LILOU: Spinning
together right now
and bridging that is
very, very important.
What various fields such as--
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
you have physics.
You have biology, biomedical
research, neuroscience,
psychiatry, and
psychology, as well.
So now you have scientists in
these various fields believing
that it's time to get
rid of the old paradigm
and to switch to
something totally new,
that we called post materialist.
>>LILOU: I'm very interested
to get into, of course,
the conversation of--
because your book, in French,
is called The Power
of Consciousness.
Here it's called
Brain Wars" Could
you tell us first why
there's a difference
in the title over there?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
because Brain Wars--
it was chosen by the editor
of the book at HarperCollins.
In the book, I'm
referring to this conflict
between the materialists who
are still dominant in science,
but also to the
other scientists,
the non-material scientists,
who are investigating phenomena
showing that the old materialist
worldview is flat wrong.
So there's a big conflict there.
Hence, the title Brain Wars.
In French, it was
called the [FRENCH]
because-- so the powers
of consciousness and mind
because this is one
line of evidence showing
that the materialist
view is erroneous.
>>LILOU: I love when you get
into the whole-- well, first
the placebo.
We can talk about
it and start there.
The placebo-nocebo effect.
And how even, I didn't
realize, but it also
has an effect even on physical
surgeries and problems.
Tell us more about that because
we don't talk enough about it,
I think.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
The placebo effect is based on
the belief and the expectations
about a treatment
that is fake, sham.
It doesn't have any real effect
biologically or medically.
Still, it as an effect
on the body just because
of your belief about it.
And it plays a role in all sorts
of medical and psychological
interventions,
including surgery.
So for instance--
>>LILOU: So a
person that thought
they had a surgery, for
example, at the knees,
but they didn't
have the surgery.
They just-- somebody put
something on top of it.
I mean a plaster.
>>BEAUREGARD: And scrape
the skin, for instance,
and made a small incision.
That was study
that has been done
in the '90s at Baylor
College in Houston
by Bruce Moseley, a surgeon.
And most of these people
were not even able
to-- they were walking with
canes before the intervention.
And after the
intervention, most of them
were even able to play
sports, including basketball,
even though they
received the placebo
surgery, the fake surgery.
So it shows that our minds
can be extremely powerful.
And there was another
very interesting study
about a placebo.
It was done with
people suffering
from Parkinson's disease.
And in Parkinson's disease,
you have destruction
of the neurons in the brain
producing a chemical messenger
that we call dopamine.
And in the case
of those patients,
the level of destruction
was about 75-80%
so it was quite severe.
And so these people
were very handicapped
from a motor point of view.
They had trouble moving.
They were experiencing a
lot of tremors and rigidity
and so on and so forth.
The doctors told these patients
that they had found something
new, a miracle cure for,
possibly, for Parkinson's.
And so those patients
who most believe in it,
they started to
produce, in their brain,
dopamine in amounts
comparable to what
you see in very young
people, people 20 years old,
for instance.
And so there was also
clinical improvement
in terms of their ability to
move, less tremor and rigidity
and so on and so
forth for a while,
because it doesn't last forever.
Still, this is quite impressive.
>>LILOU: So the body is able
to produce all those chemicals
by itself?
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
But you have to influence it.
You-- We play a-- You have to
give your body the exact orders
to create such an effect.
>>LILOU: Yet it seems quite
spontaneous and those patients
didn't know anything about
traditional science, I guess,
or the dosage.
>>BEAUREGARD: No.
Because in the case
of the placebo,
it's an unconscious process.
It's not conscious.
So you just have to believe
and expect good things
about the treatment,
and it will happen.
And now we know that it's part
of every sort of treatments.
Whenever you see a medical
doctor, a shaman, healer--
it's active in all
sorts of traditions
and for all kinds of treatments,
psychological and physical
as well.
>>LILOU: So I guess
the relationship
between the doctor or the
healer and the patient
is very important.
There should be a resonance or
some kind of alignment there.
Because otherwise
it doesn't work.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
So now there are studies
showing that to generate
a much stronger placebo
effect, the relationship
with the therapist is crucial.
Absolutely.
Because if you don't have a
good rapport with the therapist,
then the placebo effect
will be much smaller.
>>LILOU: So how does this
consciousness actually
interact with us?
Or how can we
align with it so we
can have the benefits
and the effect of being
part of something larger,
bigger, and really even
[FRENCH], self-healing,
and things like that?
How is that possible?
Is that a state of mind?
Is that a way of seeing things?
You talked about belief earlier.
Is it part of the brain?
Is there a particular
portion of the brain
that will activate that?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
it's several things.
It's beliefs,
positive expectations,
a positive relationship
with the therapist.
It's also a matter
of perception:
how you see yourself and your
beliefs about your disease
and your body and your
capacity, as well.
So it's a mix of
several factors.
But you can influence
that to a certain extent.
So if you're confident
about the outcome,
if you have a good relationship,
like we were saying,
with the therapist, then
likelihood to get very strong,
positive results is much higher.
>>LILOU: Tell us about
the neurofeedback or--
>>BEAUREGARD:
Neurofeedback-- well, it's
a technique where you learn
to control your own brain's
electrical activity.
And you do that on purpose.
So you have to have the
intention of doing this.
And so you have electrodes
recording your brain
electrical activity.
And the electrical
activity, recorded
at the level of the
electrodes, it's
translated through a video game.
It's converted under the
form of a video game.
And so when you're in the
right zone-- for instance,
if you take the case of a
child suffering from attention
deficit disorder, for instance.
They can have too
much slow waves
in the most anterior
portion of the brain,
what we call the frontal cortex.
So the training
seeks to increase,
to speed up, the brain
waves in such a case.
And so, if the child,
when he's able to do that,
the video game-- it can be
racing cars or anything else--
it moves forward.
There's animation.
And each time the child
gets out of the zone,
the target zone,
everything stops.
So and there's no music anymore
and no cartoons and everything
freezes.
So that's how the
child can learn.
He's receiving a feedback
about his own brain
electrical activity.
And for most people, you can
start controlling your brain
activity after 15-20 minutes,
usually, to a certain extent.
And if you repeat, in terms
of the number of sessions
of training, after, for
instance, 30 sessions,
you are much better
at doing this.
In the case of children
with attention deficit
and hyperactivity, they don't
need medications anymore
after, sometimes, 35-40 sessions
of neurofeedback training.
So this is very impressive.
And we've done studies in my lab
showing that when you do that,
you change the functioning
of the brain regions involved
in, for instance,
attention, concentration,
and so on and so forth.
But now we know also
that you can even
alter the structure
of the brain.
So you can increase the density
of white matter, gray matter.
>>LILOU: Tell us about that.
I wanted to ask you more about
the white matter in the brain.
What role does it play?
And could it actually
really increase?
>>BEAUREGARD: So
the white matter,
it's nerve fibers connecting
neurons in various regions,
different regions, two
regions, for instance, A and B.
So if you increase the
density of white matter,
in principle, you will--
you can increase also
the speed of transmission of
the information between the two
regions.
So the brain becomes more
efficient, if you will,
in terms of
information processing.
And you can also increase
the gray matter composed
of the nerve cells
themselves, the neurons,
the density of neurons.
So now we know that the
brain is extremely plastic.
We use the term
neural plasticity.
And even the adult
brain is quite plastic.
And it lasts all life
long, across the lifespan.
>>LILOU: Even neurons, actually?
Because we heard a lot
that we kill them if
we drink or do this or do that.
And across our lifetime?
How does that work for you?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, that's right
that we kill them, depending
on what you ingest, what
you eat, what you drink.
Alcohol, for instance,
is very toxic.
But at the same time, if
you try to learn things,
if you read books, if
you watch even movies,
or you can even play video
games-- you will create
new neurons in your
brain and especially
in certain portions of the brain
related to learning and memory,
like the hippocampus.
So we know that.
And since there's a lot of
plasticity in our brains,
it's possible to slow
down aging in that way.
>>LILOU: Some people
go all the way
to talking about immortality.
Where are you at in that matter?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
scientifically, it's
not been demonstrated yet, but
we know it may be possible.
>>LILOU: You get into hypnosis.
And I was quite excited.
And I know I'm going to do
another interview with Rachal
here-- and what's his last
name, Chaboux-- on hypnosis.
But I was quite surprised
to see it in the book.
How do you see it?
What's your angle on it?
Because I think it's
quite misunderstood.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
So people think that
when you do hypnosis
and you're the subject,
you give your control
away to the hypnotist.
But the people,
the psychologists
doing study, scientific
studies, about hypnosis,
now they know that hypnosis
is always self-hypnosis.
So it means that if you don't
want to become hypnotized,
if you don't listen to
the suggestions made
by the hypnotherapist,
it won't work.
Nobody will be able to-- So you
have-- You're bringing yourself
into an altered state
of consciousness
when you do that, if
you play the game.
>>LILOU: What does it work for?
What is it good for?
>>BEAUREGARD: All sorts of--
well, clinical purposes,
for instance, so phobia,
it can be very good.
Even depressive symptoms
and so on and so forth.
It can also have a physical
impact on the body.
There was a study done about the
speed of healing of fractures.
And it was done at
Harvard years ago.
And they have found that
if the patients were doing
self-hypnosis a few
times every week
for four weeks,
for instance, they
were increasing the speed
of healing considerably
by a very important percentage.
So you can influence, it seems,
every process in the body
and in the brain
using this technique.
>>LILOU: When we slow down,
is it because we slow down
and we reach other
levels, deeper levels.
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
about that, there's not
been a lot of studies regarding
the brain waves associated
with hypnosis.
But what we know, so
far, is that there's
a slowing down of brain waves
so you see a lot of slow waves
like theta waves, for instance.
So when there are
more theta waves,
it seems that it's associated
with a sort of expansion
of consciousness and
the sense of self.
And in that kind
of state, it seems
easier to be able to work
out psychological problems
or even physical symptoms.
>>LILOU: You speak, too,
about the consciousness,
the cosmic consciousness even.
I don't know if it's how you
say it in English, as well,
but in your French book--
is that, describe us that--
what is that term, cosmic--
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
in that state,
the little self
vanishes totally and you
become united with everything
that exists in the cosmos
and even with the
intelligent source
at the origin of everything.
And this kind of
experience has been
reported across history
in various traditions.
>>LILOU: And this
is a place where
spontaneous healing happens?
I mean, what happens
in this state?
Because often we
speak about unity.
What does that mean for you
from a scientific perspective?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, it means
that we're not really confined
to our brains and our bodies.
We are much more than-- we
are basically interconnected.
So this is very important
because, in those states,
you realize that you're
united with everything that
exists at all sorts of levels,
including what we call matter,
trees, and so on and so
forth, animals, other humans.
But also it can be also other
spiritual entities and so on
and so forth, up to what seems
to be the source of everything
in the cosmos.
>>LILOU: Is this why some
people do meditation?
I know you're big
on meditations.
And you've tested.
Tell us some of the things that
you found in the meditation.
And do they-- Are people
really-- Do monks try to get
to this level?
Is that what we call
enlightenment for some?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, yes, yes.
It's called enlightenment
in certain traditions.
But to be honest with you,
many people try meditation
but they will never
get to that point.
And sometimes, it's
very interesting
because some people have
these experiences-- they reach
these states but they never
did anything to get there.
It seems to happen
spontaneously.
I don't believe that
there may be other factors
but we don't know much
about those factors.
But, no, the studies we've
done about meditation,
it was more to measure the
impact on the emotional portion
of the brain, the emotional
brain, that we call.
It's also called
the limbic system.
And so what we measured is
that after only a few months
of practice of what
we call mindfulness--
it's a key technique in Buddhist
meditation, mindfulness.
The regions of
the brain that are
involved in emotional
responsiveness,
they quiet down a lot.
And so the brain is not
as reactive as before.
So you can produce
such an effect
after only a few
months of practice.
Again, it's neural
plasticity, which
we were talking about earlier.
>>LILOU: Yeah, yeah.
And there's activation of
some portions of the brain.
I think it's in this book
that you speak of it.
And you even got to research
on Carmelites or something.
And they're praying so
it's not just meditation.
It's a certain openness.
How would you call that?
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes, well, it
was-- with the Carmelite nuns,
they were talking
more of a state
of prayer and contemplation.
>>LILOU: The
attitude and-- grace.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes,
because they believe
that, if you have a very
intense mystical experience,
in their tradition,
they will believe
that it's because
of God's grace.
So they don't believe that--
contrary to the Eastern
traditions-- they don't believe
that you can do or practice
certain things-- for instance,
prayer and contemplation--
and that will
dramatically get there.
Because it depends
on God's will.
And so, it's a totally
different approach
than the Eastern traditions.
>>LILOU: But could that explain
how and why some people just
receive, all of a sudden,
something, some information
or all of a sudden they
see unity everywhere.
Or they have those mystical
experience, I mean, how-- Yeah.
Or being open to that
or having a relationship
even a god experience.
I mean, being already, what
is the context because there
must be some fertile
grounds for it.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yeah, but we
don't know much about this.
For sure, in order
to experience this,
you need a major
change, in terms
of what's happening
in your brain,
electrically and chemically,
because, otherwise, it's
not possible.
You focus mostly on what's
happening outside your body
and also inside your body.
But that's about it.
You need a shift, in terms
of the brain activity.
And this shift can bring
you to these type of states.
But they believe that--
so, we believe now
that the brain acts as
a filter normally, which
means that it prevents
you from reaching
those high spiritual states.
So we focus mostly on
our biological needs
and primary psychological
needs and so on and so forth,
and what we call
the external world.
But if you do
something that allows
you to shift your electrical and
chemical activity in the brain,
even for a few
minutes, for instance,
if you take
psychedelic substance,
then you disactivate the
filter function of the brain.
And then you can have
access to these things,
these other realms of reality.
>>LILOU: More and
more people are
very open to speaking of this.
I mean, it really happens
often in interviews.
I'm thinking of Graham
Hancock and David Icke
and all these really
state loudly and clearly
that they have done, and that
they have or Ramdas, of course.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes, yes.
But it can happen also
with sensory deprivation.
You can be in a sensory
tank, for instance.
And also, like I was saying,
spontaneously apparently.
So we know perhaps it comes
from directly, in those cases,
there was an
intervention directly
from what people call
the spiritual world.
Who knows.
>>LILOU: Yeah, but the
brain, how does the brain
evolve through all
those different,
through the meditation,
through being open,
through being in the gratitude,
through being spiritual--
like developing a
spiritual brain.
How does it, what
does it look like?
And is it permanent?
I mean, you spoke of neural
plasticity but was there some
kind of studies that show how
our brains are really evolving
from where they were before to
where they're now to long-term
and-- mystical side, people--
>>BEAUREGARD: No, there's
never been such a study.
They are only have
been brain imaging
studies of different spiritual
states or meditative states.
But it's you take a snapshot of
what's happening in the brain
during a few minutes only.
But no, this kind of project
has never been done so far.
So we don't know how--
>>LILOU: But the activity
would move, right?
>>BEAUREGARD: I
think, well, based
on what we've done so far, yes.
The activity in many regions
of the brain seems to change.
So it would probably change
for a long period of time.
And it would allow you to
be able to synchronize,
to catch other
frequencies, if you will.
So the brain becomes like a
transducer or a transponder
of other ranges of,
well, frequencies
or aspects of
reality, if you will.
>>LILOU: The creator
of the consciousness.
What does the light, the
role of the light itself,
the light carries
information, doesn't it?
Is it something that
you looked at, or?
>>BEAUREGARD: No,
but we know that it's
related to the-- light
is related directly
to the activity of the pineal
gland, which is located
at the very center of the brain.
And according to
spiritual tradition,
various spiritual
traditions, it's
a very important center
for spiritual states
and experiences.
But there's not any
study yet regarding
this specific question.
>>LILOU: And to tap in this
power and this consciousness,
so we are playing a major
role in that, right?
I mean, otherwise, it's
really the person experiencing
what they say in
quantum physics.
It depends really on the
person observing and living it
that will make the
whole difference.
So how do you go,
and I'm sure you
had many debates
about this, but how
do you go to make
a skeptic see it?
Where's the transition?
Where does the
transition takes place?
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, in
the case of skeptics,
it's very difficult.
But there are exceptions.
There was a very famous
skeptical philosopher
in England a few
years ago, A. J. Ayer,
and he's had a
near-death experience.
And he was affected considerably
after this experience.
And there are other
cases, as well.
But the experience has to
be a very, very intense.
In those cases,
however, these people
were not looking after
something like that.
So it happened.
Perhaps it happened for a
reason that was important,
in terms of their own
spiritual evolution.
But how do we know?
But in other cases, in
the general population,
you can do things that will,
like I said, you have to alter,
to switch, from your
normal brain activity,
electrically, chemically,
at various levels.
So in order to do that, you can
use all sorts of techniques.
Meditation will do that,
to a certain extent.
>>LILOU: But you have to have a
minimum open to try meditation.
>>BEAUREGARD: Exactly.
But if you don't have the
openness to do this, of course,
no, you won't get there.
Yeah.
>>LILOU: Is there some
techniques or some things
that are not yet
recognized or approved
by traditional science that
show us-- that could be really
the next step in
proving that, I mean,
that would be kind of the door.
I mean even telepathy
or remote viewing
or is there some that
are closer than others
that could show them or us
that this is really possible?
>>BEAUREGARD: Certain drugs.
They are called entheogens.
And so drugs that lead you
to bring you closer to God,
if you take the root of
this word or the deity
at the origin of everything,
the source of the universe.
So these substances
will alter or will
affect the filter
function of the brain.
And so it won't allow the
brain to operate as usual.
And because it shifts the
activity in your brain,
then you can access-- it's like
if you would have a TV set,
for instance, and
you are-- normally,
we are always using
the same channels.
We're watching
So you have to-- and
these channels correspond
to a certain frequency,
electromagnetically.
So we are receiving certain
electromagnetic waves.
But if you were able to switch
to other electromagnetic waves
or frequencies, in other words
to switch to other channels,
you will have access to
other aspects of reality.
And that's what these
substances will allow you to do.
I'm talking about, for instance,
DMT and stuff like that, LSD,
mescaline.
And now these
studies were stopped
for political
reasons in the 1970s,
in the United States first
and then in the entire world.
But they have started again,
five, six, seven years ago.
And now there's an increasing
amount of those studies.
One of them was done at a
famous university, John Hopkins
in Baltimore, five,
six years ago.
And it showed that it
was possible to induce
very intense mystical experience
in people who were not
mystics at all but would
took this substance.
And this experience
created long-term effects.
So they were
followed across time.
And after a few
years still, they
were experiencing major
changes, positive changes
in their lives.
>>LILOU: One person,
one experience,
unity or this kind of
cosmic intelligence,
I was going to
say, consciousness.
There's no return point.
Or at least there is
this seed, kind of,
this light that is kind of
planted within the person.
And there is something
that happens then.
So NDE or something like
that would definitely
change somebody's life.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes,
and so I've said
studied NDE-ers, people,
experiencers who've had NDEs.
And we found that,
in their brains,
there were something
changed after,
in terms of electrical activity.
Something was different.
>>LILOU: But how
can you measure it
before because you don't know
when the NDE is going to be.
Can you induce that too?
>>BEAUREGARD: No,
but we just compare
to the-- we have database
of the entire population,
the normal population.
So that's how we were able to.
But yes, that's a limitation
of the study where we're not
able to scan them
before their NDEs.
But still, we could
see things that
were completely different
than in the normal population.
So it's possible that after
these experiences or-- it can
be an NDE or you
can, perhaps, when
you take mushrooms or
so on and so forth--
something is changed
in your brain.
And this change will
allow you subsequently
to have access to other
realms of reality.
>>LILOU: Then how
one person knowing
that they can see
that and witness that
and experience that through
that experience with drugs
doesn't want to redo it and
be then addicted to that drug
or to go fully in the
experience and never
really stop until
there is a tragedy?
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes, well, these
drugs, the so-called entheogens
are not addictive at all.
They are very different than
the opiates, for instance,
like morphine or cocaine,
heroine, or stuff like that.
So the people do not
develop addiction, at least
physiological addiction,
with these drugs.
But psychologically perhaps
it would be possible, however,
to develop an addiction.
But it's not been reported
in the literature.
And it's possible
that after you--
even though you use a drug
to reach these states,
it may be easier after
that to be able by yourself
to get back to this
place even without drugs.
What we don't know
much about this yet.
>>LILOU: And it seems to be
this always this mystery,
like we're trying to
understand everything.
But there is some questions
that don't seem answered even
by the scientists
that are open-minded.
But it's actually a
good thing, isn't it?
I mean, do we have to-- we
try to understand everything
about everything when the
beauty of life might be actually
this mystery.
>>BEAUREGARD:
Yeah, absolutely, I
think it's deeply beyond what
science can do or can address.
There's still a
mystery and there
are things we'll never
be able to solve,
even using the most
advanced science.
>>LILOU: There is
beyond those wars,
there is this bigger picture.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yes.
And so this is what
creates beauty in life.
>>LILOU: Is there
something else that you
would like to mention
here because I know
there's many different areas
that you study and you give
a lot of reference, which
is really appreciated.
>>BEAUREGARD: One
important thing
is to realize that we're not
biological robots totally
determined by our brains,
our neurochemical messengers,
our genes, and so
on an so forth.
So we can greatly influence
what is happening in our brains
and all the physiological
systems connected
through our brains.
And there's evidence
now that we can even
influences the expression
of genes-- what Lipton
is talking about, epigenetics.
So we are able to
influence everything
that is happening in our body
through our own consciousness.
And so this is a
very important point
in terms of our evolution
to become conscious
of this, that we
have a great power.
>>LILOU: Could we use the word
being conscious instead of
being spiritual?
Because this is really a matter
of being conscious of what's
happening around us, being
conscious to the bigger
picture.
>>BEAUREGARD: Well, yes,
because consciousness
is one of the most
important features
of what we call
spirituality, in my view.
So yes, yes absolutely.
>>LILOU: Beautiful.
Well thank you so much.
I know there's a
lot to read here.
Brain Wars, and you wrote
many other ones, no?
There's not just those two.
>>BEAUREGARD: Well,
academic books.
>>LILOU: Papers.
>>BEAUREGARD: Yeah, yes,
yes, hundreds of them
but for specialists.
>>LILOU: I will continue
to watch your work.
And I know you're
traveling all the time
and going to all those
different places.
>>BEAUREGARD: I
met the Dalai Lama
to speak about
consciousness last summer
in Melbourne, Australia.
And yes, I'm travelling
over the world.
>>LILOU: I heard
he's very playful
and playfulness seems
to be a big component
of this whole game.
>>BEAUREGARD: Absolutely.
It's a good sign.
Yeah.
Totally.
>>LILOU: Beautiful.
Well, thank you so
much, Mario Beauregard.
Thank you.
And thank you, beautiful
ones, for watching this video.
I hope you have enjoyed it.
Please comment under the video.
I will look forward to this
conversation, you know.
Let's get it-- let's get
it bubbling because it's
important in a co-creative way.
Thank you so much.
Much, much love from
beautiful Montreal.
Thank you, Mario.
[MUSIC PLAYING]